ifendif
=======

`Ifendif` is a tool for reporting valid lines by `#if #endif directives`, with C/C++
language source codes. It uses cmdrecplay and clang's pre-processor as the backend
then refers to the macro definitions at compile time,
such as -D, -I, -W, -f, -std, etc. on command line,
and at current time,
such as #define, #undef in your source codes,
to judge validity.

So, no matter how complex your macro is, how complex your `if directive` is,
or how complex your make file is, `ifendif' correctly determines whether a line
is valid or invalid, just like at compile time.

Based on the results reported by `ifendif`, we also attached the elisp code
`if-endif.el` for grayed out in emacs.

There are prepared the Japanese documents too in the `doc.ja` directory.

Thanks
------

How to build
------------

`Ifendif` should be quite portable on UNIX OSs, it has been tested on FreeBSD,
Linux and OS X only.

### Prerequisites

1. ANSI **C++ compiler** to compile the sources.
2. **cmake** to configure the build process.
3. **pkg-config** to find dependencies during configure step.
4. **make** to run the build. Makefiles are generated by `cmake`.
5. **cmdrecplay** to execute `ifendif`.
6. **clang** to execute `ifendif`.

### Build commands

It could be the best to build it in a separate build directory.

    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake ..
    make all
    sudo make install # to install

You can configure the build process with passing arguments to cmake.
For example, debug configuration is the follows,

    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug ..
    make all


How to use as an emacsian
-------------------------

After installation, install cmdrecplay and clang too.
Write the followings in your `init.el` file.

    (autoload 'if-endif-gray-out-invalidated "if-endif"
       "Gray out C/C++ source lines invalidated by `if directives'." t)
    (autoload 'if-endif-gray-out-invalidated-all-buffers "if-endif"
       "Gray out C/C++ source lines invalidated by `if directives'." t)
    (add-hook 'c-mode-common-hook 'if-endif-gray-out-invalidated)
    (global-set-key (kbd "C-c i") 'if-endif-gray-out-invalidated)
    (global-set-key (kbd "C-c I") 'if-endif-gray-out-invalidated-all-buffers)

To associate with the `compile' command, write as follows too.

    (require 'if-endif)
    (setq compile-command "LANG=C cmdrec -- make -k ")
    (advice-add 'compile :around #'if-endif-advice-around-compile)
    (advice-add 'recompile :around #'if-endif-advice-around-compile)

First, compile your soruce codes by,

    cmdrec -- clang -D...<etc> your_source_code.c

or

    cmdrec -- make

Next, execute emacs and find-file `your_source_code.c`.
When editing is repeated and the display becomes distorted,
or if you change some macro definitions of any header files,
enter `C-c i` to redisplay it.
Also, if you change some macro definitions of the makefile,
re-execute `cmdrec - make` and enter `C-c i` to redisplay it.


How to use as program
---------------------

After installation, install cmdrecplay and clang too.

First, compile your soruce codes by,

    cmdrec -- clang -D...<etc> your_source_code.c

or

    cmdrec -- make

Next, execute `ifendif`

    ifendif your_source_code.c


Known issues
------------

Problem reports
---------------

If you find a bug in this documentation or elsewhere in the program or would
like to propose an improvement, please use the project's [github issue
tracker][ISSUES]. Please describing the bug and where you found it. If you
have a suggestion how to fix it, include that as well. Patches are also
welcome.

Algorithm
---------

1. Examine lines which contain `#if #ifdef #ifndef #else #elif #endif directives` in source file. Consider that source file is consist of regions which is divided by `if directive` lines.

example: test.c

    /* sample */
    #if defined(DEBUG)
    #define OK
    #else
    int main(int argc,char *argv[])
    {
      return 0;
    }
    #endif
    /* end */

Consider to

    region 1
    #if defined(DEBUG)
    region 2
    #else
    region 3
    #endif
    region 4

2. Copy source file to dummy file and insert magic line (TK-region-<n>) into the head of regions which is divided by `if directive` lines.

dummy file

    TK-region-1
    /* sample */
    #if defined(DEBUG)
    TK-region-2
    #define OK
    #else
    TK-region-3
    int main(int argc,char *argv[])
    {
      return 0;
    }
    #endif
    TK-region-4
    /* end */

3. Process dummy file by pre-processer (clang cc1) using of options (-D -f -U etc.) which is specified in compile process.

example: pre-processing without DEBUG

    TK-region-1
    
    
    
    
    
    TK-region-3
    int main(int argc,char *argv[])
    {
      return 0;
    }
    
    TK-region-4

4. Examine to see which magic lines remain in the pre-processing result, then output line numbers where `if directive` exists.

example:
V,2,H,4,V,9,V

This example means that:

    There are `if directives` in second, fourth, and nineth lines.
    It does not matter which directive is specifically written on which line.
    The area from the first line to the second line is valid.
    The area consisted of the third line is invalid.
    The area from the fourth line to the nineth line is valid.
    The area from the nineth line to the last line of file is also valid.


Author
------

* Dr.Sc.KAWAMOTO,Takuji (Ext)
* 川本 琢二（Ｅｘｔ）
* System Architect (Panasonic Advanced Technology Development Co., Ltd.)
* システム・アーキテクト (パナソニック アドバンストテクノロジー(株))
* Doctor of Science (Mathematics)
* 理学博士 (数学)
* Jazz Pianist
* ジャズ・ピアニスト
* My Representative Freeware Works: Prolog-TK over LISP,TwentyOne,DEDIT,TeX previewer,fontman,WiZ backup tool,nm.x,sort.x,hounds,assembler,dis-assembler,TCP/IP over ITRON,FullereneViewer,cmdrecplay,ifendif
